what is the difference between political
ideology and religious ideology my
answer is really exactly the same as
what I've just said about the definition
of literature the definition of
literature is anything that a publishing
company decides to categorize as
literature there is no intrinsic or
essential or even meaningful line that
separates literature from comedy a book
may be sold in the comedy section of the
bookstore for 50 years or 100 years and
then at some point somebody somewhere
decides to repackage the same book and
sell it as fine literature there are
other books that start off in the
philosophy section and then get
rebranded and sold in politics or
economics and so on what these other
people are doing is that when they
perceive the world they see it in terms
of labels that imperfectly respond to
actual essential things or traits and
they often become frustrated and angry
at the imperfect relationship as they
see it between the label and the real
thing that they think is supposed to be
described by the lately they have an
ideal about what religion ought to be
what politics are political ideology
ought to be they may have an idea about
what literature itself ought to be what
that category ought to include or
exclude they have an idealized category
in their mind and then they struggle
with themselves and they struggle with
other people to try to make the real
match up with the ideal they look at the
world and see a series of masks and
presume that each one of those masks
fails to resemble a real face but the
real face is one that they've never seen
before one that doesn't have a name one
that doesn't have an identity as a child
I was really astounded when my father
said to me that there was no difference
between a plant and a weed it was just a
question of our attitude when looking at
something like a dandelion is this a
plant or is it a weed these are labels
that we apply and
there is no underlying reality whether
the plant is useful or noxious whether
it's a plant you're actively farming
because you'd like to make dandelion
wine or you'd like to eat dandelion
roots or prepare dandelion salad or
visit plant your eradicating because you
feel that the dandelions are ruining
your rose bushes that is a matter of
human perception only if you ask me what
is the difference between religion and
politics what is the difference between
religious ideology and political
ideology my answer is that these are
labels that are neither
more or less real than the labels that
are used to categorize literature
philosophy and comedy
baddest yen it is always refreshing and
is often instructive when you can talk
about a really deep issue in a really
shallow way this is a somewhat deep
question that came to me from patreon
supporter in response to my recent video
that talked about the relationship
between the ideal and the real in
politics and political science the first
time I articulated the point I'm gonna
make in this video right now it was
actually when I was working in Starbucks
and about the year 1997 when I was
employed at a Starbucks making coffee
before I became vegan and I had a
statistic that I believe I just read out
of the newspaper it could have been out
of a magazine or journal but it wasn't
from some academic source and this
statistic claimed at that time based on
market research you were more likely to
be HIV positive in the United States
which is to say you were more likely to
have the disease known as AIDS in the
United States of America you were more
likely to have HIV AIDS than you were to
read literature and the people I told
this at work they were blown away they
were astounded of this and the first
question they asked always was well how
would you define literature and he just
reiterated what was already in the first
part of the claim this is based on
market research so it's the size of the
market for books that are marketed as
literature that's what we're talking
about here so the definition of
literature is anything that the
publishing companies categorize as
literature right so the question that
came to me here was of how do i define
the term etiology and why do I or how do
I dare why do I treat religion and
political ideology in one category this
way why do I talk about communism and
Catholicism in the same terms under the
same heading both as being ideologies
and both as being ideologies that have
killed millions of people
all the way real right this is he thinks
that tend to come up my channel now it's
not with our reason it's not for no
reason from my nihilistic perspective
religious ideology and political
ideologies are indeed very similar they
have many of the same flaws mainly the
same drawbacks many of the same dangers
you could say they have many of the same
organizing principles positively or
neutrally in terms of how they organize
people and spur them into action on an
individual psychological level and also
scaling up looking in society there are
many many things that have in common but
the person who sent me this question
expressed that from his perspective of
religion really was profoundly different
from a mere political ideology that from
his perspective something like Hinduism
or Islam really belongs in a very
different category from something like
communism or socialism or what
libertarianism I suppose we could throw
another other political ideologies here
well you know he may feel that way he's
in tell to feel that way but if someone
asked me sincerely what is the
difference between political ideology
and religious ideology my answer is
really exactly the same as what I've
just said about the definition of
literature the definition of literature
is anything that a publishing company
decides to categorize as literature if
they decide that this book can sell as
literature if they decide to market it
as literature then its literature and
there's no point debating the
application of the category we can
debate whether it is good literature or
bad literature we can debate whether it
is great literature or trivial we can
debate whether it is memorable or
nominal we can debate of course whether
or not the book is worth reading but
there is no intrinsic or essential or
even meaningful line that separates
literature from comedy a book may be
sold in the comedy section of the
bookstore for 50 years or 100 years and
then at some point somebody somewhere to
say
to repackage the same book and sell it
as fine literature this has happened
many times I'm sure it happened to
Voltaire and a number of other famous
authors nothing changed about the book
nothing even really changed but the way
the book is perceived or read in our
society I would say and yet it's made
this transition there are other books
that were published under one heading or
another and end up migrating into the
philosophy section there are other books
that start off in the philosophy section
and then get rebranded and sold in
politics or economics and so on ok this
is actually a profound part of my life
it comes up again and again all the time
talking about politics and talking about
personal life very serious experience
what these other people are doing is
that when they perceive the world they
see it in terms of labels that
imperfectly
respond to actual essential things or
traits and they often become frustrated
and angry at the imperfect relationship
as they see it between the label and the
real thing that they think is supposed
to be described by the label now they
will always be frustrated because what
they imagine is a real thing is in fact
nothing it's an ideal they have an ideal
about what religion ought to be what
politics are political ideology ought to
be they may have an idea about what
literature itself ought to be what that
category ought to include or exclude
they have an idealized category in their
mind and then they struggle with
themselves and they struggle with other
people to try to make the real match up
with the ideal and I don't do that they
look at the world and see a series of
masks and presume that each one of those
masks fails to resemble a real face but
the real face is one that they've never
seen before one that doesn't have a name
one that doesn't have an identity one
that isn't a person they could describe
as beautiful or ugly familiar or
unfamiliar the world for them becomes a
Hall of Mirrors
with these labels and masks and their
constant sense of frustration and
struggle with for example other students
studying politics with them that the
other students around them don't share
their ideals don't share their beliefs
in these ideologies and don't share
their frustrations with these
imperfections as to how the labels are
applied to particular examples failing
to represent what they think of as the
reality of the thing and what I see as
something quite unreal and misleading
and even a little bit dangerous okay so
yes this is something I mean it's deep
and it's shallow at the same time or
it's something deep that I can talk
about in a shallow way if you ask me
what is the difference between religion
and politics what is the difference
between religious ideology and political
ideology my answer is that these are
labels that are neither more or less
real than the labels that are used to
categorize literature philosophy and
comedy in the bookstore or where they
sell DVDs or CDs or any other media that
these are label labels that shouldn't be
believed in that shouldn't be seen to
confer any kind of value there leave
labels that are ultimately as
meaningless as the numerical code
assigned to the book by a librarian
they're only there to help you find what
it is you're looking for and as
arbitrarily as those labels have been
applied they can be rescinded they can
be rewritten they can be changed and new
labels applied again in the same way
that have said before as a child I was
really astounded when my father said to
me quite a casual and shallow way that
there was no difference between a plant
and a weed it was just a question of our
attitude when looking at something like
a dandelion is this a plant or is it a
weed these are labels that we apply and
there is no underlying reality whether
the plant is useful or noxious whether
it's a plant you're
actively farming because you'd like to
make dandelion wine or you'd like to eat
dandelion roots or prepare dandelion
salad or if it's a plant you're
eradicating because you feel that the
dandelions are ruining your rose bushes
that is a matter of human perception
only and it's a subtle thing that so
many people let this slip away from
their finger tips and instead as I said
before look at the world as this series
of imperfect masks staring back at them
I think when this person was writing to
me I think that's what's going on for
them they feel angry and frustrated that
I don't share their belief in an
intrinsic difference between religion
and political ideology and that's
correct I don't share that belief I
don't share in any beliefs and for me
all of these differences are extrinsic
about us yen